+++
author = "hannibal"
categories = ["Rust", "totp"]
date = "2018-09-13T08:01:00+01:00"
title = "TOTP generator with account handling for multiple tokens"
url = "/2018/09/13/gotp"
description = "Gotp"
featured = "gotp.png"
featuredalt = "gotp"
featuredpath = "date"
linktitle = ""
draft = false
+++

Hi.

Today, I would like to write about a little tool I put together in Rust.

It's called [gotp](https://github.com/Skarlso/totp). I'm calling it gotp mainly
because of crates.io. I published it there as well, you can find it under this
link: [crates.io/gotp](https://crates.io/crates/gotp).

The purpose is clear. It's a totp generator I wrote a while ago in C++ but now
it's in rust. It can generate a token and save it into an account file that is
AES encrypted. The password is never saved, so it's secure enough to use it.

One of it's properties it will have over the c++ implementation is it's safe,
it uses a proper IV and once I'm done, it will also support encryption via PGP.

That way a password will no longer be asked, but the gpg-agent will be used instead.

This will give a much needed usability boost in which a password will no longer be
asked for constantly.

There is also a possibility to place the account file into DropBox or Google Drive
and share it between your own devices. This way your home laptop will also have
the same account as your work laptop making it essentially an Authy like service
on the CLI.

Enjoy, and keep an eye out for the PGP update. For more information in usage, please
read the README.

Thank you!
Gergely.

