+++
author = "hannibal"
categories = ["aoc"]
date = "2021-12-15T01:01:00+01:00"
title = "Advent Of Code - Day 15"
url = "/2021/12/15/aoc-day15"
comments = true
+++

# Advent Of Code - Day 15

Today, again, we open up [Red Blob Games](https://www.redblobgames.com/pathfinding/a-star/introduction.html).
It is a great source of information and descriptions. Especially, since this scenario is right up Red Blob's ally.
We need some weighted path finding. And Red Blob has a lovely post on that using the ever famous [Dijkstra](https://www.redblobgames.com/pathfinding/a-star/introduction.html#dijkstra) algorithm with a Priority Queue.

## Day 15 - Part 1

Let's get to it. After refreshing my memory about priority queues, I remembered that there is a package and some sample
code in Go which implements priority queues using the `container/heap` package [here](https://pkg.go.dev/container/heap#example-package-PriorityQueue).

Pretty straight forward. There are some bits that we don't need. For example, the `update` function is not needed.
And there is a single small thing which we really need to be aware of in this code base. This part:

```go
func (pq PriorityQueue) Less(i, j int) bool {
	// We want Pop to give us the highest, not lowest, priority so we use greater than here.
	return pq[i].priority > pq[j].priority
}
```

This infuriating detail got me at least 20 minutes of trying to figure out why my path wasn't correct. We need to change
this to `<`.

Also, important detail is that you don't use the priority queue directly. You use it with `heap.Push(&pq)`. Otherwise
the priorities and indexes will not be up to date.

Okay, first... We parse our grid using our trusty character cheat code:

```go
	for _, i := range input {
		row := make([]int, 0)
		for _, v := range i {
			c := v - '0'
			row = append(row, int(c))
		}
		grid = append(grid, row)
	}
```

Then we write our path finding. It's a bit more verbose in Go than in Python of course. We have to initialize the PQ,
then add in some code to get the neighbors, than set up the `cameFrom` part and traverse that backwards to get our full
path. I'm sure there are better solutions out there than this, but this is what I feel comfortable with. And I saw many
solutions using PQ.

The whole thing looks like this:

```go
	start := point{x: 0, y: 0}
	goal := point{x: len(grid[0]) - 1, y: len(grid) - 1}
	pq := make(PriorityQueue, 0)
	heap.Init(&pq)
	heap.Push(&pq, &Item{
		point:    start,
		priority: grid[0][0],
	})
	cost := map[point]int{
		start: grid[0][0],
	}
	cameFrom := map[point]point{
		start: start,
	}
	for pq.Len() > 0 {
		current := heap.Pop(&pq).(*Item)

		if current.point == goal {
			break
		}
		for _, next := range neighbors(current.point, grid) {
			newCost := cost[current.point] + grid[next.y][next.x]
			if v, ok := cost[next]; !ok || newCost < v {
				cameFrom[next] = current.point
				cost[next] = newCost
				heap.Push(&pq, &Item{
					point:    next,
					priority: newCost,
				})
			}
		}
	}
```

Not that bad. And now, following the path back and calculating the sum.

```go
	var sum int
	current := goal
	for current != start {
		sum += grid[current.y][current.x]
		current = cameFrom[current]
	}
	fmt.Println("sum: ", sum)
```

And that's it. This is our correct number. Now, checking part 2...

## Day 15 - Part 2

Part 2 is the same, but with a twist. We have to expand the grid by... what? Uh. So, our tile is just a piece of a
greater tile. And as we duplicate our tile, we need to increase the numbers by one compared to their original part.

Okay, this takes a little bit to wrap my head around. So let's remove some rules and make it easier. First, let's deal
with a simpler objective. Just copy our initial tile into a 5x5 grid. To do that, we create the initial grid with the
size original y * 5 and original x * 5.

```go
	expandedGrid := make([][]int, len(grid)*5)
	for i := 0; i < len(expandedGrid); i++ {
		expandedGrid[i] = make([]int, len(grid[0])*5)
	}
```

Done. Now, copy over the initial rows.

```go
	// Prime the first tile
	for y := 0; y < len(grid); y++ {
		for x := 0; x < len(grid[y]); x++ {
			expandedGrid[y][x] = grid[y][x]
		}
	}
```

With this, actually we did create our 5x5 matrix, so let's think a little bit about the problem. We take each number of
the original grid, and +1-it compared to the previous number in the original grid. Let's make this easy as the example
has it. If the grid would be a single number, `8`, we would get this grid:

```
8 9 1 2 3
9 1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4 5
2 3 4 5 6
3 4 5 6 7
```

If look at the pattern, all we have to do is create the first row correctly, and then we just +1 downwards on each
column and we are golden(star (pun intended))! Nice. So, let's create that first row.

```go
	// fill out first line for all of the original grid sizes.
	for y := 0; y < len(grid); y++ {
		for x := len(grid[y]); x < len(expandedGrid[y]); x++ {
			// x - the length of the initial grid
			newValue := (expandedGrid[y][x-len(grid[y])] + 1) % 10
			if newValue == 0 {
				newValue = 1
			}
			expandedGrid[y][x] = newValue
		}
	}
```

Basically, the `newValue := (expandedGrid[y][x-len(grid[y])] + 1) % 10` new value, is the original location, which is
the current location minus the size of the original grid[y] and then +1. And it wraps around of course.

That's fantastic. With that, we have our first row like this:

```
89123
00000
00000
00000
00000
```

Now, we just have to go downwards with the same logic. Compared to the original location, minus the size, and +1.

```go
	// fill out downwards
	for y := len(grid); y < len(expandedGrid); y++ {
		for x := 0; x < len(expandedGrid[y]); x++ {
			// x - the length of the initial grid
			newValue := (expandedGrid[y-len(grid)][x] + 1) % 10
			if newValue == 0 {
				newValue = 1
			}
			expandedGrid[y][x] = newValue
		}
	}
```

And done! We have our correct grid! We run the path finding, which didn't change, and we have our correct result!
Another star in the bag!

## Conclusion

Today, we again learned that Red Blob Games is an invaluable resource of path finding information. And it's nice to read
through the material once in a while to refresh our knowledge about these things that exist. And we had some fun
manipulating a matrix again and understanding that patterns will save our asses in these exercises.

The repository for all my solutions for AOC 2021 can be found [here](https://github.com/Skarlso/aoc2021).

Thank you for reading!

Gergely.
